---
title: Exercise 1.3.32
description: functor is an equivalence of cateogories if and only if it is full, faithful and essentially surjective on objects
---


**Theorem**:
Let $$F : \mathbf{A} \rightarrow \mathbf{B}$$ be a functor.
$$F$$ is an equivalence of categories if and only if $$F$$ is full, faithful, and essentially surjective on objects.


*Proof*:
Assume that $$F$$ is an equivalence.
Then, we have a functor $$G : \mathbf{B} \rightarrow \mathbf{A}$$, and two natural isomorphisms $$\eta : 1_{\mathbf{A}} \rightarrow G \circ F$$ and $$\varepsilon : F \circ G \rightarrow 1_{\mathbf{B}}$$.

We first show that $$F$$ is faithful.
Let $$s : A \rightarrow A'$$ be an arrow in $$\mathbf{A}$$.
We have a component $$\eta_A : 1_{\mathbf{A}}(A) \rightarrow (G \circ F)(A)$$.
The naturality condition says that $$\eta_{A'} \circ 1_{\mathbf{A}}(s) = (G \circ F)(s) \circ \eta_A$$.
Of course $$1_{\mathbf{A}}(A) = A$$ and $$1_{\mathbf{A}}(s) = s$$.
So simplifying a bit, we have $$\eta_{A'} \circ s = (G \circ F)(s) \circ \eta_A$$.
If there were another arrow $$t : A \rightarrow A'$$ with $$F(s) = F(t)$$, it would follow that $$(G \circ F)(s) = (G \circ F)(t)$$.
But then, we obtain by combining this with the respective naturality conditions:

$$
\eta_{A'} \circ s= (G \circ F)(s) \circ \eta_A = (G \circ F)(t) \circ \eta_A = \eta_{A'} \circ t
$$

Since $$\eta$$ is a natural isomorphism, $$\eta_{A'}$$ is an isomorphism, thus the outer-most inequality implies $$s = t$$.

Now we show that $$F$$ is full.
Consider $$g : F(A) \rightarrow F(A')$$ an arrow in $$\mathbf{B}$$.
Take $$f = \eta_{A'}^{-1} \circ G(g) \circ \eta_A$$.
This is well-defined since $$\eta$$ is a natural isomorphism and thus $$\eta_{A'}$$ is an isomorphism.
By naturality we have $$\eta_{A'} \circ f = (G \circ F)(f) \circ \eta_A$$.
Then $$f = \eta_{A'}^{-1} \circ (G \circ F)(f) \circ \eta_A$$.
Equating this with the previous expression for $$f$$:

$$
\eta_{A'}^{-1} \circ G(g) \circ \eta_A = \eta_{A'}^{-1} \circ (G \circ F)(f) \circ \eta_A
$$

and since $$\eta_{A'}$$ and $$\eta_A$$ are both isomorphisms we can conclude that  $$(G \circ F)(f) = G(g)$$.
This really means that $$G(F(f)) = G(g)$$.
But, $$G$$ is an equivalence -- we showed that equivalences are faithful in the preceding paragraph.
Thus, we can conclude that $$F(f) = g$$.

Finally, we show that $$F$$ is essentially surjective on objects.
Let $$B \in \mathbf{B}$$.
We claim that $$G(B)$$ is the desired element so that $$F(G(B)) \cong B$$.
In fact, $$\varepsilon_B : (F \circ G)(B) \rightarrow 1_{\mathbf{B}}(B)$$ is an isomorphism between $$F(G(B))$$ and $$B$$.

Now assume that $$F$$ is full, faithful, and essentially surjective on objects.
We will define the functor $$G$$.
For a $$B \in \mathbf{B}$$, define $$G(B)$$ as any particular object in $$\mathbf{A}$$ whose image under $$F$$ is isomorphic to $$B$$, say via a particular isomorphism $$\varepsilon_B$$ (there is at least one since $$F$$ is essentially surjective on objects).
That is, we have $$\varepsilon_B : F(G(B)) \rightarrow B$$.
We now need to define $$G$$ on arrows.
For an arrow $$s : B \rightarrow B'$$ in $$\mathbf{B}$$, note that
$$F$$ gives a bijection $$\Hom(G(B), G(B')) \leftrightarrow \Hom(F(G(B)), F(G(B'))$$, since it is full and faithful.
Then let $$G(s) = F^{-1}(\varepsilon_{B'}^{-1} \circ s \circ \varepsilon_B)$$ -- the inner term is a map $$F(G(B)) \rightarrow F(G(B'))$$ and we take the inverse image under the bijection given by $$F$$.

We now claim that we have a natural isomorphism $$\varepsilon : F \circ G \rightarrow 1_{\mathbf{B}}$$, with components $$\varepsilon_B$$ as chosen above.
Note that since every $$\varepsilon_B$$ is an isomorphism, $$\varepsilon$$ will be a natural isomorphism as long as it is a natural transformation -- so we need only show the latter, which amounts to checking the naturality condition, which is straightforward:
For a map $$s : B \rightarrow B'$$ in $$\mathbf{B}$$, we have:

$$
\varepsilon_{B'} \circ (F \circ G)(s) = \varepsilon_{B'} \circ (\varepsilon_{B'}^{-1} \circ s \circ \varepsilon_B) = s \circ \varepsilon_B = 1_{\mathbf{B}}(s) \circ \varepsilon_B
$$

and $$\varepsilon$$ is a natural isomorphism.

Finally, we define $$\eta : 1_{\mathbf{A}} \rightarrow G \circ F$$.
For $$A \in \mathbf{A}$$, we need to define $$\eta_A : A \rightarrow G(F(A))$$.
Note that $$\varepsilon_{F(A)}^{-1}$$ is a map $$F(A) \rightarrow FGF(A)$$.
Since $$F$$ is full and faithful, it gives an bijection $$\Hom(A, GF(A)) \leftrightarrow \Hom(F(A), FGF(A))$$.
So, let $$\eta_A = F^{-1}(\varepsilon_{F(A)}^{-1})$$.
It is straightforward to check that since $$\varepsilon_{F(A)}^{-1}$$ is an isomorphism, its preimage under the bijection given by $$F$$ will be as well.
So each $$\eta_A$$ is an isomorphism and we need only check naturality.
So, consider a $$t : A \rightarrow A'$$ in $$\mathbf{A}$$.
Considering $$F(t) : F(A) \rightarrow F(A')$$ an arrow in $$\mathbf{B}$$, we know the following is true:

$$
FGF(t) \circ \varepsilon_{F(A)}^{-1} = \varepsilon_{F(A')}^{-1} \circ F(t)
$$

(since the inverse of $$\varepsilon$$ is also a natural isomorphism $$1_{\mathbf{B}} \rightarrow F \circ G$$).
But, both sides can be rewritten to yield:

$$
F(GF(t) \circ \eta_A) = F(\eta_{A'} \circ t)
$$

and since $$F$$ is faithful, we can conclude that

$$
GF(t) \circ \eta_A = \eta_{A'} \circ t
$$

which is precisely the naturality condition for $$\eta$$.
Thus, $$\eta$$ is a natural isomorphism, completing the proof.
