---
title: Exercise 5.2.23
---


We demonstrate categories with maps that are epic but *not* surjective:

**Theorem**:
In the category of monoids $$\mathbf{Mon}$$, the inclusion $$(\mathbb{N}, +, 0) \xrightarrow{i} (\mathbb{Z}, +, 0)$$ is epic


*Proof*:
Suppose we have maps $$(\mathbb{Z}, +, 0) \xrightarrow{f, g} (M, \cdot, e)$$ and $$f \circ i = g \circ i$$.
This essentially means that $$f$$ and $$g$$ are identical on positive integers.
We show that this implies that they're also identical on negative integers.
Indeed, let $$n < 0$$.
Then,

$$
f(n) = f(n) \cdot e = f(n) \cdot g(0) = f(n) \cdot g(-n + n) = f(n) \cdot g(-n) \cdot g(n) = \ldots
$$

then, since $$-n > 0$$, we have $$g(-n) = f(-n)$$:

$$
\ldots = f(n) \cdot f(-n) \cdot g(n) = f(-n + n) \cdot g(n) = f(0) \cdot g(n) = e \cdot g(n) = g(n)
$$

as desired.
Since $$f$$ and $$g$$ are clearly identical on $$0$$, we have $$f(n) = g(n)$$ for all $$n \in \mathbb{Z}$$, so $$f = g$$.


**Theorem**:
In the category of rings $$\mathbf{Rng}$$, the inclusion $$\mathbb{Z} \xrightarrow{i} \mathbb{Q}$$ is epic.


*Proof*:
Suppose we have maps $$\mathbb{Q} \xrightarrow{f,g} R$$ for some ring $$R$$, and $$f \circ i = g \circ i$$.
This means that $$f$$ and $$g$$ are identical on the integers.
We show this implies they are identical on all rationals.
Indeed, let $$\dfrac{p}{q}$$ be some fully reduced rational number.
Then, we have:

$$
f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) \cdot 1 = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) \cdot g\left(1\right) = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) \cdot g\left(q \cdot \dfrac{1}{q}\right) = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) \cdot g(q) \cdot g\left(\dfrac{1}{q}\right) = \ldots
$$

and $$g(q) = f(q)$$, so

$$
\ldots = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right) \cdot f(q) \cdot g\left(\dfrac{1}{q}\right) = f\left(\dfrac{p}{q} \cdot q\right) \cdot g\left(\dfrac{1}{q}\right) = f(p) \cdot g\left(\dfrac{1}{q}\right) = \ldots
$$

and $$f(p) = g(p)$$ so,

$$
\ldots = g(p) \cdot g\left(\dfrac{1}{q}\right) = g\left(p \cdot \dfrac{1}{q}\right) = g\left(\dfrac{p}{q}\right)
$$

as desired.
So $$f(q) = g(q)$$ for all rational $$q$$, and $$f = g$$.
