---
title: Hatcher Exercise 2.1.14
layout: math-page
chapter: 2
exercise: 1.14
---


**(a)** Consider $$0 \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_4 \xrightarrow{\alpha} \mathbb{Z}_8 \oplus \mathbb{Z}_2 \xrightarrow{\beta} \mathbb{Z}_4 \rightarrow 0$$.
We wish to determine if there is a choice of $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ that makes this into a short exact sequence.



Indeed, pick $$\alpha$$ to be the map sending $$1 \mapsto (2,1)$$.
Then, $$H = \im \alpha = \set{(0, 0), (2, 1), (4, 0), (6, 1)}$$.
Notice then that $$(\mathbb{Z}_8 \oplus \mathbb{Z}_2) / H$$ is group of order 4.
One can check that the element $$(1, 0) + H$$ has order 4, so it must generate the group and the quotient is isomorphic to $$\mathbb{Z}_4$$.
This lets us define $$\beta$$ as the quotient map, giving a short exact sequence.

---

**(b)** Now consider $$0 \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}_{p^m} \xrightarrow{\alpha} A \xrightarrow{\beta} \mathbb{Z}_{p^n} \rightarrow 0$$, for $$p$$ prime.
We wish to find which abelian groups $$A$$ admit maps that make the sequence exact.
First note that, for this sequence to be exact, we need $$\mathbb{Z}_{p^n} \cong A / \mathbb{Z}_{p^m}$$.
Thus, $$A$$ must have order $$p^n p^m = p^{m+n}$$.



A certain class of groups of order $$p^{m+n}$$ can be constructed as follows: $$A_k = \mathbb{Z}_{p^{m+n-k}} \oplus \mathbb{Z}_{p^k}$$ for $$0 \leq k \leq \min\set{m,n}$$.
Notice when $$k$$ is minimal we get $$\mathbb{Z}_{p^{m+n}}$$ and when $$k$$ is maximal we get $$\mathbb{Z}_{p^m} \oplus \mathbb{Z}_{p^n}$$ (or the other way around).



The maps can be explicitly constructed.
For $$A_k$$, let $$\alpha$$ be the map sending $$1 \mapsto (p^{n-k}, 1)$$.
Then with $$H = \im \alpha$$ (which is of order $$p^m$$), we must have $$\abs{A_k / H} = p^n$$.
We claim that $$(1,0) + H$$ is an element of order $$p^n$$, and thus the quotient is isomorphic to $$\mathbb{Z}_{p^{n}}$$.
To see this, consider an arbitrary coset in $$A_k / H$$ represented by $$(a,b)$$.
Notice that $$(a,b) - b(p^{n-k}, 1)$$ represents the same coset, since we are subtracting a multiple of an element of $$H$$.
But, we have:

$$
(a, b) - b(p^{n-k}, 1) = (a-bp^{n-k}, 0) = (a-bp^{n-k})(1, 0)
$$

What we've shown is that every coset, and therefore element of $$A_k / H$$, is represented by a multiple of $$(1, 0)$$.
So, $$(1,0) + H$$ generates the (cyclic) quotient group, so it must be isomorphic to $$\mathbb{Z}_{p^n}$$.
Then, let $$\beta$$ be the quotient map and we have a short exact sequence.



So all of the groups $$A_k$$ are acceptable.
To show that these are *all* the groups (up to isomorphism, of course), we note that $$A$$ is generated by two (non-unique)  elements: $$a$$ and $$b$$ such that $$\alpha(1) = a$$ and $$\beta(b) = 1$$ (this implies that $$A$$ must be isomorphic to direct product of two cyclic groups, since $$a$$ and $$b$$ necessarily generate cyclic subgroups):

To see *this*, let $$x \in A$$ be arbitrary.
There are two possibilities: either $$x \in \im \alpha$$ or not.



Suppose $$x \in \im \alpha$$.
Then $$x$$ is a multiple of $$a$$ (since $$\im \alpha$$ is a cyclic subgroup).



Suppose $$x \not\in \im \alpha$$.
Then we can also conclude that $$x \not\in \ker \beta$$.
This means that $$\beta(x)$$ is a non-trivial element, and thus a multiple of $$\beta(b)$$, i.e. $$\beta(x) = k \beta(b) = \beta(kb)$$.
This means that $$\beta(x - kb) = 0$$, so that $$x - kb \in \ker \beta$$.
Then, $$x - kb \in \im \alpha$$, so we have $$x - kb = ta$$.
We now conclude that $$x = ta + kb$$ for some $$t, k$$.
So in both cases, $$x$$ is expressed as a combination of $$a$$ and $$b$$.

---

**(c)** Finally, consider $$0 \rightarrow \mathbb{Z} \xrightarrow{\alpha} A \xrightarrow{\beta} \mathbb{Z}_n \rightarrow 0$$.



Here, we show explicitly that $$A_d \cong \mathbb{Z} \times \mathbb{Z}_d$$ for all $$d$$ such that $$d \mid n$$ are acceptable.
Set $$q = n/d$$.
Let $$\alpha$$ be the map

$$
t \mapsto (t, [tq])
$$

Let $$\beta$$ be the map

$$
(x,[y]) \mapsto [y - xq]
$$

Since $$\beta(t, [tq]) = tq - tq = 0$$, we have $$\im \alpha \subseteq \ker \beta$$.

Let $$(t, [y]) \in \ker \beta$$.
Then, $$y-tq = kn$$ and $$y=kn + tq = k(qd) + tq$$.
Then, $$[y] = [kqd + tq] = [tq]$$ (modulo $$d$$).
So, $$(t,[y]) = (t, [tq]) \in \im \alpha$$.
So we have $$\ker \beta \subseteq \im \alpha$$

Then $$\ker \beta = \im \alpha$$, and $$A_d$$ with this choice of $$\alpha$$ and $$\beta$$ makes the sequence exact.
