---
title: Hatcher Exercise 2.1.16
---


**(a)** **Theorem**: $$H_0(X,A) = 0$$ if and only if $$A$$ meets each path component of $$X$$.

---

*Proof*:
We start with a lemma, and then apply Proposition 2.6 from Hatcher.

**Lemma**: For $$A \subset X$$ with $$X$$ path-connected, $$H_0(X,A)$$ is trivial.

*Proof*:
From the long exact sequence relating homology groups and relative homology groups, we have:

$$
\dots \rightarrow H_0(A) \xrightarrow{i_*} H_0(X) \xrightarrow{j_*} H_0(X,A) \rightarrow 0
$$

$$H_0(X)$$ is generated by a single basepoint -- in particular, by some basepoint $$a \in A$$.
Thus, $$H_0(X)$$ is generated by $$a$$, and $$a$$ is at least among the generators of $$H_0(A)$$ ($$A$$ may not be path connected itself).
Then, we must at least have that $$i_*$$ is surjective.
But this means $$\ker j_*$$ is $$H_0(X)$$, and $$\im j_* = \set{0} = H_0(X,A)$$.

$$\mjqed$$

Now, we use the fact that for a general space $$X$$, there is an isomorphism $$H_n(X) \cong \bigoplus_i H_n(X_i)$$ for each path component of $$X$$.
Let $$A_i = A \cap X_i$$ be the non-empty intersection of $$A$$ with each path component of $$X$$.
Then, we have:

$$
\bigoplus_i H_0(A_i) \xrightarrow{i_*} \bigoplus_i H_0(X_i) \xrightarrow{j_*} \bigoplus_i H_0(X_i, A_i) \rightarrow 0
$$

The boundary maps in this sequence all split across the direct sums, and we apply the lemma (note each $$X_i$$ is path-connected) to each component, yielding $$H_0(X_i, A_i) = 0$$ for all $$i$$.
Then, $$\bigoplus_i H_0(X_i, A_i) = H_0(X,A) = 0$$ as well.

---

**(b)** **Theorem**:
$$H_1(X,A) = 0$$ if and only if $$H_1(A) \rightarrow H_1(X)$$ is surjective and each path-component of $$X$$ contains *at most* one path component of $$A$$.

---

*Proof*:
Again, start with a lemma:



**Lemma**: For $$A \subset X$$ with $$X$$ path-connected, $$H_1(X,A)$$ is trivial if and only if $$i_* : H_1(A) \rightarrow H_1(X)$$ is surjective and $$A$$ is path-connected.

*Proof*:
Consider the relevant portion of the long exact sequence:

$$
\dots \rightarrow H_1(A) \xrightarrow{i_*} H_1(X) \xrightarrow{j_*} H_1(X,A) \xrightarrow{f} H_0(A) \xrightarrow{i_*} H_0(X) \rightarrow \dots
$$

From a previous result, we know that $$H_1(X,A)$$ is trivial if and only if $$i_* : H_1(A) \rightarrow H_1(X)$$ is surjective (a hypothesis), and $$i_* : H_0(A) \rightarrow H_0(X)$$ is injective.
We show the latter.



Note that $$H_0(X)$$ is generated by a single basepoint, in particular a basepoint in $$A$$.
Then, $$H_0(A)$$ is generated by the same point (here we use that $$A$$ is path-connected).
Thus, $$H_0(A) = H_0(X)$$ in fact, and $$i_*$$ is clearly injective.

$$\mjqed$$

Consider now a general space $$X$$ with path components $$\set{X_i}$$, and let $$A_i = A \cap X_i$$.
Then, again we consider the exact sequence:

$$
\bigoplus_i H_1(A_i) \rightarrow \bigoplus_i H_1(X_i) \rightarrow \bigoplus_i H_1(X_i, A_i) \rightarrow \bigoplus_i H_0(A_i) \rightarrow \bigoplus_i H_0(X_i)
$$

The boundary maps split across the direct sums, and we apply the lemma to each component (this time, note that each $$A_i$$ is path-connected because each path component of $$X$$ contains no more than one path component of $$A$$).
Then, we conclude $$H_1(X_i, A_i)$$ is trivial for all $$i$$, and thus $$H_1(X,A)$$ is trivial.
