---
title: Hatcher Exercise 2.2.29
layout: math-page
chapter: 2
exercise: 2.29
order: 229
description: Calculating the homology of the interiors of two copies of a 2-surface identified along the 2-surface itself
---


The surface $$M_g$$ of genus $$g$$ (i.e. a connect sum of $$g$$ tori), when embedded in $$\mathbb{R}^3$$, bounds a compact solid region $$R \subseteq \mathbb{R}^3$$.
Let $$X$$ be two copies of this space $$R$$ with their boundaries (the actual surface) identified via the identity map, giving a three-manifold.
We calculate the homology.
Let $$A$$ be one region with an open neighborhood into the other, and likewise for $$B$$.
The region $$R$$ bounded by $$M_g$$ deformation retracts onto its core -- a wedge of $$g$$ circles.
So, $$A$$ and $$B$$ deformation retract onto a wedge of $$g$$ circles.
$$A \cap B$$ deformation retracts onto $$M_g$$ itself.
So $$\wt{H}_1(A) = \wt{H}_1(B) = \mathbb{Z}^g$$, $$\wt{H}_1(A \cap B) = \mathbb{Z}^{2g}$$ and $$\wt{H}_2(A \cap B) = \mathbb{Z}$$ (and others zero).
Meyer-Vietoris gives:

$$
0 \rightarrow \wt{H}_3(X) \rightarrow \mathbb{Z} \rightarrow 0 \rightarrow \wt{H}_2(X) \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}^{2g} \xrightarrow{\Phi} \mathbb{Z}^g \oplus \mathbb{Z}^g \rightarrow \wt{H}_1(X) \rightarrow 0
$$

First note $$\wt{H}_3(X) \cong \mathbb{Z}$$.
Now the details of the map $$\Phi$$.
$$\mathbb{Z}^{2g}$$ is generated by the $$a_i$$ and $$b_i$$ in the familiar representation as a polygon, i.e. $$\la a_i, \dots, a_g, b_i, \dots, b_g \ra$$.
$$\mathbb{Z}^g \oplus \mathbb{Z}^g \cong \mathbb{Z}^{2g}$$ has the core circles as generators in both summands, so write it as $$\la c_1, \dots, c_g, d_1, \dots, d_g \ra$$.
For each 'sub-torus' of the genus $$g$$ surface, the deformation retraction takes one of $$a_i$$ or $$b_i$$ *to* the core circle (in both regions), and contracts the other onto a single point.
Say the $$a_i$$'s are mapped onto the core circle.
With these assumptions, we have $$\Phi(a_i) = c_i + d_i$$ and $$\Phi(b_i) = 0$$.
Firstly, we have $$\wt{H}_2(X) \cong \ker \Phi = \la b_1, \dots, b_g \ra \cong \mathbb{Z}^g$$.
Secondly, we compute $$\wt{H}_1(X) \cong \mathbb{Z}^{2g} / \im \Phi$$.
We have:

$$
\wt{H}_1(X) = \dfrac{\la c_1, \dots, c_g, d_1, \dots, d_g \ra}{\la c_1 + d_1, \dots, c_g + d_g \ra}
= \dfrac{\la c_1 + d_1, \dots, c_g + d_g, d_1, \dots, d_g \ra}{\la c_1 + d_1, \dots, c_g + d_g \ra} \cong \mathbb{Z}^g
$$
