---
title: Exercise 2.1.16
---

Fix a group $$G$$.
We are asked to find interesting functors between $$\mathbf{Set}$$ and $$[G, \mathbf{Set}]$$ (the category of left $$G$$-sets).
Here, instead of considering the objects of $$[G, \mathbf{Set}]$$ to be functors $$G \rightarrow \mathbf{Set}$$, simply consider them to be pairs $$(S, \cdot)$$ where $$(\cdot) : G \times S \rightarrow S$$ satisfies $$g_1 \cdot (g_2 \cdot s) = g_1 g_2 \cdot s$$.

An obvious start would be the forgetful functor $$U : [G, \mathbf{Set}] \rightarrow \mathbf{Set}$$ that takes a $$G$$-set to its underlying set.
We ask if this functor has an adjoint.
Indeed, let $$F : \mathbf{Set} \rightarrow [G, \mathbf{Set}]$$ be defined as follows:
for a set $$S$$, $$F(S) = (G \times S, \cdot)$$ where $$g' \cdot (g, s) = (g'g, s)$$.
For a map of sets $$f : S \rightarrow T$$, $$F(f) : (G \times S) \rightarrow (G \times T)$$ is the map $$(g, s) \mapsto (g, f(s))$$, which is easily verified to be $$G$$-equivariant.
Notice this is essentially a 'free' functor, taking \textit{any} set $$S$$ to a $$G$$-set in the most general arbitrary way.

Let's make this functor $$F$$ more precise for the sake of pedantry.
Let $$A$$ be a $$G$$-set and $$B$$ a set.
If $$t : U(A) \rightarrow B$$ is a map of sets, we define $$\overline{t} : A \rightarrow F(B)$$ as $$\overline{t}(a) = (1, t(a))$$.
In the other direction, if $$r : A \rightarrow F(B)$$ is a $$G$$-equivariant map, define $$\overline{r} : U(A) \rightarrow B$$ where $$\overline{r}(a) = b$$ iff $$r(a) = (\dash, b)$$.

This idea also works for the categories $$\mathbf{Vect}_k$$ of vector fields over $$k$$ and $$[G, \mathbf{Vect}_k]$$ of $$k$$-linear representations of $$G$$.
Again let $$U : [G, \mathbf{Vect}_k] \rightarrow \mathbf{Vect}_k$$ be the forgetful functor.
This has a left adjoint $$F$$ where, for a $$k$$-vector space $$V$$ with basis $$\set{v_1, \dots, v_r}$$ and assuming $$G = \set{g_1, \dots, g_s}$$, we have $$F(V) = kG \otimes V$$ which has basis $$\setbuilder{g_i \otimes v_j}{1 \leq i \leq s, 1 \leq j \leq r}$$, equipped with the representation $$g \cdot \sum_{i,j} \lambda (g_i \otimes v_j) = \sum_{i,j} \lambda (g g_i \otimes v_j)$$.
This is the so-called 'induced representation' from representation theory in the special case that the sub-representation is the trivial representation of the trivial subgroup.
Again, the 'induced' representation captures the idea of the 'most general' representation that extends another.
