---
title: Exercise 2.3.12
chapter: 2
exercise: 3.12
layout: math-page
---

For sets $$A$$ and $$B$$, consider a \textit{partial function} from $$A$$ to $$B$$ to be a pair $$(S,f)$$ where $$S \subseteq A$$ and $$f$$ is a normal function $$S \rightarrow B$$.
This captures the notion that the partial function is only 'defined' on $$S$$.
Let $$\mathbf{Par}$$ be the category of sets with maps being partial functions.
Let $$\mathbf{Set}_*$$ be the category of sets with distinguished elements, with maps being functions that preserve distinguished elements.

**Theorem**:
$$\mathbf{Par}$$ is equivalent to $$\mathbf{Set}_*$$.


*Proof*:
First, we write down a functor $$T : \mathbf{Par} \rightarrow \mathbf{Set}_*$$ that 'completes' a partial function into a regular (total function) by adding a special element to the sets.
In particular, for a set $$A$$ let $$T(A) = (A \cup \set{\bot_A}, \bot_A)$$.
We add an element to the set and quite literally *distinguish* it because it is special.
For a map $$(S, f) : A \rightarrow B$$, let

$$
T(S,f) = a \mapsto \left\{ \begin{array}{lr}
f(s) & a \in S \\
\bot_B & \text{otherwise}
\end{array} \right.
$$

Note that this map takes $$\bot_A$$ to $$\bot_B$$ so it does preserve distinguished elements.

Define $$N : \mathbf{Set}_* \rightarrow \mathbf{Par}$$ as follows:
For a pointed set $$(A, x)$$ let $$N(A, x) = A \backslash x$$.
For a point-preserving map $$f : (A, x) \rightarrow (B, y)$$ let $$N(f) = (f^{-1}(B \backslash y), \hat{f})$$, where $$\hat{f}$$ is simply the restriction of $$f$$ to the set $$f^{-1}(B \backslash y)$$.
This is well-defined precisely because $$f^{-1}(B \backslash y)$$ certainly does not contain $$x$$, and certainly $$f$$ does not send anything in $$f^{-1}(B \backslash y)$$ to $$y$$!

We wish to define $$\eta : 1 \rightarrow NT$$.
So for $$A$$ a set $$A$$, we need the component $$\eta_A : A \rightarrow NTA$$, but since $$NTA = A$$, we just have $$\eta_A : A \rightarrow A$$.
We make the obvious choice then and let $$\eta_A = (A, 1_A)$$, which is the identity arrow on $$A$$ in $$\mathbf{Par}$$.
Let's verify that this is actually a natural transformation.
Let $$(S,f) : A \rightarrow B$$ be a map in $$\mathbf{Par}$$.
We need $$\eta_B \circ (S, f) = NT(S, f) \circ \eta_A$$, but this follows immediately because $$NT(S, f) = (S, f)$$ and $$\eta_A$$ and $$\eta_B$$ are identity arrows.
So we have naturality.
Furthermore every $$\eta_A$$ is clearly an isomorphism so $$\eta$$ is a natural isomorphism.

We will now define $$\varepsilon : TN \rightarrow 1$$.
We need $$\varepsilon_{(A, x)} : TN(A, x) \rightarrow (A, x)$$ a point-preserving map.
Note that $$TN(A, x)$$ is the set $$A$$ with $$x$$ replaced by $$\bot_A$$, and $$\bot_A$$ distinguished instead of $$x$$.
So, $$\varepsilon_{(A,x)}$$ be the map sending $$\bot_A \mapsto x$$ and $$a \mapsto a$$ for all other elements $$a$$.
Let $$f : (A,x) \rightarrow (B,y)$$ be a map in $$\mathbf{Set}_*$$.
To check naturality we need

$$
\varepsilon_{(B, y)} \circ TN(f) = f \circ \varepsilon_{(A,x)} : TN(A,x) \rightarrow (B,y)
$$

Let's examine $$TN(f)$$ -- it can be described explicity as:

$$
TN(f) = a \mapsto \left\{ \begin{array}{lr}
f(a) & f(a) \neq y \\
\bot_B & \text{otherwise}
\end{array} \right.
$$

Let $$a \in TN(A,x)$$.
We will consider where $$a$$ is sent by the left-hand side and the right-hand side by considering cases.
First suppose $$a \neq \bot_A$$, and $$f(a) = y$$.
Then the right-hand side sends $$a$$ to $$y$$, and the left-hand side sends $$a \mapsto \bot_B \mapsto y$$.
Suppose $$a \neq \bot_A$$ and $$f(a) \neq y$$.
Then the right-hand side sends $$a$$ to $$f(a)$$, and so does the left.
Finally, suppose $$a = \bot_A$$.
Then the right-hand side sends $$a \mapsto x \mapsto y$$.
The left-hand side sends $$a \mapsto \bot_B \mapsto y$$.
So the left and right-hand side are identical in all cases, so they must represent the same map.
Then, we have naturality.
Furthermore, $$TN(A,x)$$ and $$(A,x)$$ are certainly equal cardinality, so they are in bijection and all components of $$\varepsilon$$ are isomorphisms.
Thus $$\varepsilon$$ is a natural isomorphism.

So, we have shown an equivalence between $$\mathbf{Par}$$ and $$\mathbf{Set}_*$$.
