---
title: Exercise 5.1.40
chapter: 5
exercise: 1.40
layout: math-page
---


For a category $$\mathbf{A}$$ and object $$A$$, let $$\mathbf{Monic}(A)$$ denote the full subcategory of $$\mathbf{A} / A$$ whose objects are the monic morphisms.
A *subobject* of $$A$$ is an isomorphism class of objects in $$\mathbf{Monic}(A)$$.

**Theorem**:
Let $$X \xrightarrow{m} A$$ and $$Y \xrightarrow{n} A$$ be monics in $$\mathbf{Set}$$.
$$(X, m)$$ and $$(Y, n)$$ are isomorphic in $$\mathbf{Monic}(A)$$ if and only if $$m$$ and $$n$$ have the same image.


*Proof*:
Suppose $$m$$ and $$n$$ have the same image.
Denote $$S = m(X) = n(Y)$$.
Then in fact $$m$$ and $$n$$ are bijections, considered as $$m : X \rightarrow S$$ and $$n : Y \rightarrow S$$.
Take $$f = n^{-1} \circ m : X \rightarrow Y$$ and $$g = m^{-1} \circ n : Y \rightarrow X$$.
Clearly $$(X, f)$$ is a morphism in $$\mathbf{Monic}(A)$$: $$n \circ f = n \circ n^{-1} \circ m = m$$ and similarly for $$(Y, g)$$.
It's tirival then that $$f \circ g = g \circ f = \id$$, so $$(X, f)$$ and $$(Y, n)$$ are isomorphic.

Suppose $$(X, m)$$ and $$(Y, n)$$ are isomorphic.
Then, we have $$f : X \rightarrow Y$$ and $$g : Y \rightarrow X$$ that are morphisms in $$\mathbf{Monic}(A)$$ (meaning $$n \circ f = m$$ and $$m \circ g = n$$), and furthermore $$f$$ and $$g$$ are (mutually inverse) isomorphisms.
The latter fact is actually not needed for this direction.
Observe that that the first equality guarantees that anything in the image of $$m$$ is in the image of $$n$$, and the second guarantees that anything in the image of $$n$$ in the in the image of $$m$$.
So, $$m(X) = n(Y)$$.

$$\mjqed$$

So, we have that subobjects of a set $$A$$ are in canonical correspondence with the subsets of $$A$$.

In $$\mathbf{Top}$$, the situation calls for a bit more subtlety.
There exist monics in $$\mathbf{Top}$$ that that have the same subspace as an image, but are not isomorphic.
Consider the space $$A = [0, 2\pi)$$ and $$B = [0, 2\pi]$$.
In both cases, consider the map $$f : t \mapsto (\cos t, \sin t)$$.
So we have $$A \xrightarrow{f} \mathbb{R}^2$$ and $$B \xrightarrow{f} \mathbb{R}^2$$ that are monics with the same image ($$S^1$$), but $$A$$ and $$B$$ are not homeomorphic, and hence these are two *different* subobjects.
However, isomorphism classes of *embeddings* (a continuous injective function that is homeomorphic onto its image) do correspond one-to-one with subspaces.
