---
title: Exercise 6.1.6
chapter: 6
exercise: 1.6
order: 106
layout: math-page
description: Interpreting a chapter theorem about a right adjoint to the limit functor
---


Consider the theorem at the end of chapter six:

**Theorem**:
Let $$\mathbf{I}$$ be a small category and $$\mathbf{A}$$ a category with all limits of shape $$\mathbf{I}$$.
Then $$\lim_{\mathbf{I}}$$ defines a functor $$[\mathbf{I}, \mathbf{A}] \rightarrow \mathbf{A}$$ which is right-adjoint to the diagonal functor $$\Delta : \mathbf{A} \rightarrow [\mathbf{I}, \mathbf{A}]$$.


We wish interpret this theorem in the special case that $$\mathbf{A} = \mathbf{Set}$$ and $$\mathbf{I}$$ is a group.

First note that $$[G, \mathbf{Set}]$$ is the category of $$G$$-sets -- that is, groups equipped with a $$G$$-action $$G \times S \rightarrow S$$.
In this scenario, the diagonal functor $$\Delta : \mathbf{Set} \rightarrow [G, \mathbf{Set}]$$ takes a set $$S$$ to $$(S, \cdot)$$, where $$S$$ is now equipped with the trivial $$G$$-action where $$g \cdot s = s$$ for all $$g$$ and $$s$$ (alternatively, $$g \cdot \dash = \id_S$$ for all $$g$$).

To find out what $$\lim_{\mathbf{I}}$$ does, we first need to consider what constitutes a cone over a $$G$$-set.
Given a $$G$$-set $$(S, \cdot)$$, a cone consists of a set $$A$$ and a single map $$f : A \rightarrow S$$ such that $$(g \cdot \dash) \circ f = f$$ for all $$g$$.
To rephrase, that means that $$g \cdot f(a) = f(a)$$ for all $$a \in A$$ and $$g \in G$$.
This means that every $$f(a)$$ is stabilized by the whole group $$G$$.
So a cone is a pair $$(A, f)$$ where $$f$$ must take each element to a $$G$$-invariant element.
So a *universal* cone (limit cone) can be computed by the usual construction giving arbitrary limits in $$\mathbf{Set}$$.
We find that the limit is precisely the subset of $$S$$ consisting of $$G$$-invariant elements.

We are finally ready to interpret the adjunction.
The adjunction means that $$[G, \mathbf{Set}](\Delta S, T) \cong \mathbf{Set}(S, \lim_{\mathbf{I}} T)$$ for any set $$S$$ and $$G$$-set $$(T, \cdot)$$.
Indeed, one can observe that a $$G$$-equivariant map from $$\Delta S$$ to $$T$$ can only map onto $$G$$-invariant elements of $$T$$, so of course such a map is determined completely by a map $$S \rightarrow \lim_{\mathbf{I}} T$$, which is precisely the subset of $$G$$-invariant elements.

The dual of the preceding theorem says that colimits are *left*-adjoint to the diagonal functor.
In the present context, let's interpet the $$\colim_{\mathbf{I}}$$ functor.
Consider some $$G$$-set $$(S, \cdot)$$.
We can use the general construction for colimits in set and find that the colimit is $$S / {\sim}$$, where $$\sim$$ is the precisely the equivalence relation induced by the $$G$$-action (orbits correspond to equivalence classes).
So, the adjunction says that $$\mathbf{Set}(S / {\sim}, T) \cong [G, \mathbf{Set}](S, \Delta T)$$.
Indeed, its easy to see that for a $$G$$-equivariant map $$S \rightarrow \Delta T$$, all members of an orbit must map on to the same element, so of course such a map is determined by a mapping from the orbits of $$S$$ to $$T$$.
