---
title: Sipser Exercise 1.54
layout: math-page
chapter: 1
exercise: 54
order: 54
description: The language $$F = \setbuilder{a^i b^j c^k}{i,j,k \geq 0 \text{ and if } i = 1, \text{ then } j=k}$$ is not regular, but satisfies the pumping lemma
---



**(a)** The language $$F = \setbuilder{a^i b^j c^k}{i,j,k \geq 0 \text{ and if } i = 1, \text{ then } j=k}$$ is not regular.

----

*Proof*:
Suppose $$F$$ were regular.
Let $$G = \setbuilder{a b^i c^j}{i,j \geq 0}$$.
Observe that $$G$$ is regular. In particular, a regular expression for $$G$$ is $$a b^* c^*$$.



But, $$F \cap G = H = \setbuilder{a b^n c^n}{n \geq 0}$$.
We show that $$H$$ is non-regular.
Suppose it were and let $$p$$ be the pumping length.
Take $$z = a b^p c^p$$, $$z \in H$$ and $$|z| \geq p$$.
Take $$z = uvw$$, $$|uv| \leq p$$ and $$|v| \geq 1$$.



If $$v = a$$, then $$u v^0 w = b^p c^p$$ which is not in $$H$$.
If $$v = ab^k$$ for some $$1 \leq k < p$$, then $$u v^0 w = b^{(p-k)} c^p$$ which is not in $$H$$.
If $$v = b^k$$ for some $$k \geq 1$$, then $$u v^0 w = a b^{(p-k)} c^p$$ which is not in $$H$$.
This contradicts the pumping lemma so $$H$$ is non-regular.



So, we have the the intersection of two regular languages producing a non-regular language, a contradiction.
So it must be the case that $$F$$ is not regular.

---

**(b)**  $$F$$ satisfies the pumping lemma.

----

*Proof*:
Take the pumping length $$p = 2$$.
We show that every string of length at least 2 can be pumped.
Let $$z \in F$$ such that $$|z| \geq 2$$ be arbitrary.



Suppose there are no $$a$$'s in $$z$$.
Then $$z = b^i c^j$$ with $$i+j \geq 2$$.
Take $$z = uvw$$ where $$u = \epsilon$$, $$v$$ is the first symbol of $$z$$ and $$w$$ is the rest of $$z$$ (note $$|uv| \leq 2$$ and $$|v| \geq 1$$).
Then clearly, $$u v^m w \in F$$ for any $$k \geq 0$$ because this simply changes the number of occurrences of the first symbol in $$z$$ (be it $$b$$ or $$c$$).



Suppose there is one $$a$$ in $$z$$.
It must come first, so $$z = a b^n c^n$$, with $$n \geq 1$$.
Take $$z = uvw$$ where $$u = \epsilon$$, $$v = a$$, and $$w$$ is the rest of $$z$$ (note $$|uv| \leq 2$$ and $$|v| \geq 1$$).
Then $$u v^m w \in F$$ because this simply changes the number of $$a$$'s at the beginning of the string.



Suppose there are two $$a$$'s in $$z$$.
Then $$z = a^2 b^i c^j$$ with $$i,j \geq 0$$.
Take $$z = uvw$$ with $$u = \epsilon$$, $$v = a^2$$, and $$w$$ is the rest of $$z$$.
Then $$u v^m w \in F$$ because this simply alters the amount of $$a$$'s in the string, but since it can never be the case that $$v^m = a$$, the restriction that the $$b$$'s and $$c$$'s must be equal in number is never encountered.



Suppose there are more than two $$a$$'s in $$z$$.
Then $$z = a^i b^j c^k$$ with $$i \geq 3$$ and $$j, k \geq 0$$.
Take $$z = uvw$$ with $$u = \epsilon$$, $$v = a$$, and $$w$$ is the rest of $$z$$.
Then $$u v^m w = a^y b^j c^k$$ where $$y \geq 2$$ (that is, the lowest amount of $$a$$'s remaining after pumping is 2).
Because $$y \neq 1$$, this is clearly in $$F$$.



So $$F$$ satisfies the pumping lemma.
