---
title: Sipser Exercise 1.61
---


let $$\Sigma = \set{a, b}$$ and define the family of languages:

$$
C_k = \setbuilder{x}{x \text{ has an } a \text{ in the } k \text{th position from the right end}}
$$

**Theorem**: Any DFA recognizing $$C_k$$ must have at least $$2^k$$ states.

----

*Proof*:
Consider the set of words $$\Sigma^k$$ and note that there are $$2^k$$ unique words in $$\Sigma^k$$.
We will show that any DFA $$M$$ must take *different* strings in $$\Sigma^k$$ to *different* states.



Let $$x, y \in \Sigma^k$$ such that $$x \neq y$$.
Write $$x = x_1 x_2 \dots x_k$$ and $$y = y_1 y_2 \dots y_k$$.
Since they are unequal, let $$d$$ be the first index at which $$x$$ and $$y$$ differ.
Then, between $$x_d$$ and $$y_d$$, one must be an $$a$$ and one must be a $$b$$.
WLOG, suppose that $$x_d = a$$ and $$y_d = b$$ (otherwise, relabel $$x$$ and $$y$$).



Now, we want to construct *new* strings $$x'$$ and $$y'$$, adding characters at the end until $$x'$$ has its $$a$$ in the $$k$$th spot from the end, and $$y'$$ has its $$b$$ in the $$k$$th spot from the end.
So let $$x' = x \cdot a^{d-1}$$ and $$y' = y \cdot a^{d-1}$$.
Of course, we could have added $$b$$s to the end as well, the choice doesn't matter.
Then $$|x'| = |y'| = k + d - 1$$, and the $$kth$$ index from the end is $$(k + d - 1) - (k - 1) = d$$.
So, since $$x_d = a$$ and $$y_d = b$$, $$x' \in C_k$$ and $$y' \not\in C_k$$.



Now, notice that $$\hat{\delta}(q_0, x') = \hat{\delta}(\hat{\delta}(q_0, x), a^{d-1}) \in F$$, because $$x'$$ is accepted.



At the same time, $$\hat{\delta}(q_0, y') = \hat{\delta}(\hat{\delta}(q_0, y), a^{d-1}) \not\in F$$ because $$y'$$ is rejected.



If it *were* the case that $$\hat{\delta}(q_0, x) = \hat{\delta}(q_0, y)$$, then the same starting point and the same string $$a^{d-1}$$ would drive the machine to *different* states, which is a contradiction.
So it must be the case that $$\hat{\delta}(q_0, x) \neq \hat{\delta}(q_0, y)$$.



So since each of the $$2^k$$ strings in $$\Sigma^k$$ must drive the machine to a unique state, $$M$$ must have at least $$2^k$$ states.
