---
title: Sipser Exercise 2.44
layout: math-page
chapter: 2
exercise: 44
order: 44
---



**Theorem**: If $$A$$ and $$B$$ are regular, then $$A \diamond B = \setbuilder{xy}{x \in A, y \in B \tand \abs{x} = \abs{y}}$$ is context-free.

----

*Proof*:
There are finite automatons $$M_A$$ and $$M_B$$ that recognize $$A$$ and $$B$$, respectively.
Let the be deterministic, and write $$P_A = (Q_A, \Sigma, \delta_A, q_{0A}, F_A)$$ and $$P_B = (Q_B, \Sigma, \delta_B, q_{0B}, F_B)$$.



So, we construct a PDA for $$A \diamond B$$.
The machine will work by progressing through $$A$$'s machine, pushing a counter on to the stack.
Each time it hits one of $$M_A$$'s accepting states, it will make a non-deterministic guess that its passed the mid-point of the string, and spawn a thread transitioning to the starting state of $$M_B$$.
It will then progress through $$B$$'s machine, popping the counters off the stack.
If the machine is in a final state of $$M_B$$ when the stack is empty, it transitions to an accept state (of course, if there is more input, the thread that wound up in the accept state will terminate).



Let $$P = (Q, \Sigma, \Gamma, \delta, q_0, F, Z_0)$$, accepting by final state.
Let $$Q = Q_A \cup Q_B \cup \set{q_f}$$ and $$q_0 = q_{0A}$$.
Let $$F = \set{q_f}$$.
Finally, let $$\Gamma = \set{k, Z_0}$$.



Now, we define $$\delta$$ as follows.

$$
\delta(q, x, T) = \left\{ \begin{array}{lr}
\set{(\delta_A(q, x), kT)} & x \neq \epsilon \tand q \in Q_A \\
\set{(\delta_A(q, x), kT), (q_{0B}, T)} & x = \epsilon \tand q \in F_A \\
\set{(\delta_B(q, x), \epsilon)} & x \neq \epsilon \tand q \in Q_B \\
\set{(\delta_B(q, x), \epsilon), (q_f, T)} & x = \epsilon \tand T = Z_0 \tand q \in F_B
\end{array} \right.
$$

Where conditions not written result in $$\varnothing$$.
This machine accepts $$A \diamond B$$, so $$A \diamond B$$ is context free.