---
permalink: "{{ page.filePathStem }}.html"
title: Hatcher Exercise 0.16
layout: article
hasMath: true
chapter: 0
exercise: 16
order: 16
description: The infinite sphere is contractible
---

**Theorem**: $$S^{\infty}$$ is contractible.

---

*Proof*: Give $$S^{\infty}$$ the cell-complex structure described in Hatcher where the spheres and hemispheres of each dimension are subcomplexes -- that is, regarding each $$S^k$$ as obtained from $$S^{k-1}$$ by adding two $$k$$-cells which are the components of $$S^k - S^{k-1}$$.

For an arbitrary $$x$$ in $$S^{\infty}$$, it must be the case that $$x \in S^n$$ for some $$n$$.
Furthermore, $$S^n$$ is precisely the boundary of $$D^{n+1}$$, which is another sub-complex of $$S^{\infty}$$.
So each $$x$$ lies inside a closed disc.



For each $$n$$, let $$F_n$$ be the deformation retract of $$D^n$$ to the $$D^{n-1}$$ represented by half of its boundary, where we take $$D^0$$ to be a point.
Of course, each $$F_n$$ could retract onto one of two copies of $$D^{n-1}$$.
Distinguish a basepoint $$d_0$$ (one of the two $$D^0$$ subcomplexes), and simply define each $$F_n$$ to retract onto the $$D^{n-1}$$ containing $$d_0$$.

Let $$H : S^{\infty} \times I \rightarrow S^{\infty}$$ be a homotopy defined as follows:
For a point $$x \in S^{\infty}$$ such that we have $$x \in D^n$$ in particular for some $$n$$, let:

$$
H(x,t) = \left\{
\begin{array}{lr}
x & 0 \leq t < 1/2^{n+1} \\
F_n(x,t) & 1/2^{n+1} \leq t \leq 1/2^n \\
F_{n-1}(x,t) & 1/2^n \leq t \leq 1/2^{n-1} \\
\vdots & \vdots \\
F_1(x,t) & 1/2 \leq t \leq 1
\end{array} \right.
$$

The continuity of $$H$$ is worth discussing, as it is not immediately obvious:
A map on a CW-complex is continuous if and only if its restriction to every $$n$$-skeleton is continuous (appendix of Hatcher).
For any $$n$$, note that $$H$$ is 'motionless' for the interval $$[0, 1/2^{n+1})$$, after which it merely performs a finite sequence of continuous homotopies.
So the restriction to any skeleton is continuous and $$H$$ is continuous.


It's clear that $$H(x, 0) = x$$, and $$H(x, 1) = d_0$$.
Then, by construction, $$H$$ is a homotopy from the identity map on $$S^{\infty}$$ and the constant map to $$d_0$$ and thus, $$S^{\infty}$$ is contractible.