---
permalink: "{{ page.filePathStem }}.html"
title: Exercise 2.2.13
chapter: 2
exercise: 2.13
order: 213
layout: article
hasMath: true
description: Formulating quantifiers as functors
---

Let $$f : K \rightarrow L$$ be a map of sets.
Let $$f^* : \mathscr{P}(L) \rightarrow \mathscr{P}(K)$$ be the inverse image functor, sending a subset $$B$$ to its preimage under $$f$$.
Consider $$\mathscr{P}(L)$$ and $$\mathscr{P}(K)$$ as ordered sets (via inclusion) -- then $$f^*$$ is order preserving.
Then, further considering $$\mathscr{P}(L)$$ and $$\mathscr{P}(K)$$ as *categories* makes $$f^*$$ into a functor.

A left adjoint to $$f^*$$ is the the direct image functor, $$f_* : \mathscr{P}(K) \rightarrow \mathscr{P}(L)$$, sending a subset $$A \subseteq K$$ to its image under $$f$$.
We claim $$f_* \dashv f^*$$.
The unit $$\eta$$ is the statement "for all $$A \in \mathscr{P}(K)$$, $$A \subseteq f^* f_* A$$", which is clearly true.
Likewise, the counit is the statement "for all $$B \in \mathscr{P}(L)$$, $$f_* f^* B \subseteq B$$", clearly true as well.

The right adjoint is much harder.
We will denote it $$f_*^c$$ and call it the "complemented image functor".
Define $$f_*^c(A) = f_*(A^c)^c$$, where $$(\cdot)^c$$ denotes the complement in the appropriate set ($$K$$ or $$L$$).
The unit and counit statements are a bit nontrivial and require proof.
The unit says "For all $$B \in \mathscr{P}(L)$$, $$B \subseteq f_*^c f^* B$$".
This is non-trivial, and we show its truth via the following chain of implications:

$$
\begin{align*}
& b \not\in f_*^c f^* B \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & b \not\in f_*(f^*(B)^c)^c \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & b \in f_*(f^*(B)^c) \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \exists x \in f^*(B)^c \tst f(x) = b \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \exists x \not\in f^*(B) \tst f(x) = b \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \exists x \tst f(x) \not\in B \tand f(x) = b \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & b \not\in B
\end{align*}
$$

So by contrapositive we have the unit.
the counit is the statement "For all $$A \in \mathscr{P}(K)$$, $$f^* f_*^c A \subseteq A$$".
We show this directly:

$$
\begin{align*}
& a \in f^* f_*^c A \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & a \in f^*(f_*(A^c)^c) \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & f(a) \in f_*(A^c)^c \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & f(a) \not\in f_*(A^c) \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \forall x \in A^c, f(x) \neq f(a) \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \forall x, x \not\in A \Rightarrow f(x) \neq f(a)  \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & \forall x, f(x) = f(a) \Rightarrow x \in A \\
\Rightarrow \enspace & a \in A
\end{align*}
$$

thus, the unit and counit statements are true, and we have an adjunction $$f^* \dashv f_*^c$$.

So, $$f^*$$ has left and right adjoints: $$f_* \dashv f^* \dashv f_*^c$$.



Now, let's apply this to a particular situation.
Let $$X$$ and $$Y$$ be sets and $$p : X \times Y \rightarrow X$$ be projection.
We will regard a subset $$S \subseteq X$$ as a predicate $$S(x)$$ that is true on the members of $$S$$.
Similarly subsets $$R \subseteq X \times Y$$ are 2-predicates $$R(x,y)$$.

We wish to determine what the left and right adjoints from the previous construction, $$p_*$$ and $$p_*^c$$, represent in terms of predicates.
This is really just a matter of interpreting the definitions in the language of logic.
Given a 2-predicate $$R(x,y)$$, one can see that $$p_* R$$ is the predicate

$$
\exists y \in Y \tst R(x,y)
$$

which is a predicate in one variable $$x \in X$$.
Since $$p_*^c$$ is defined in terms of $$p_*$$ in the first place, we can simply plug it in and interpret complement as "not" ($$\neg$$).
So $$p_*^c R$$ is the predicate

$$
\neg (\exists y \in Y \tst \neg R(x,y))
$$

Of course, this reduces to

$$
\forall y \in Y, R(x,y)
$$

So, when we take $$p$$ as the projection onto $$X$$, $$p_*$$ corresponds to the operation of placing "$$\exists y \in Y$$" in front of the input, and $$p_*^c$$ places "$$\forall y \in Y$$" in front of the input.
