---
permalink: "{{ page.filePathStem }}.html"
title: Exercise 5.2.26
chapter: 5
exercise: 2.26
order: 226
layout: article
hasMath: true
description: The inclusion $$\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbf{Q}$$ in $$\mathbf{Rng}$$ is monic and epic but not an isomorphism. However, a map is an isomorphisms when it is monic and *regular* epic
---


In $$\mathbf{Rng}$$, the inclusion $$\mathbb{Z} \hookrightarrow \mathbb{Q}$$ is monic and epic but not an isomorphism.
If we slightly strengthen the requirements, however, we obtain:

**Theorem**:
A map is an isomorphism if and only if it is monic and \underline{regular} epic.


*Proof*:
Assume $$m : B \rightarrow C$$ is monic and regular epic.
Then it is the coequalizer of some parallel pair $$A \xrightarrow{f,g} B$$.
This means that $$m \circ f = m \circ g$$, but since $$m$$ is monic, $$f = g$$.
Since this is the case, $$\id_B$$ equalizes $$f$$ and $$g$$, so we obtain a unique map $$\varphi : C \rightarrow B$$ such that $$\varphi \circ m = \id_B$$.
Then, $$m \circ \varphi \circ m = m = \id_C \circ m$$.
Since $$m$$ is epic (regular epic $$\Rightarrow$$ epic), we have $$m \circ \varphi = \id_C$$.
So, $$m$$ is an isomorphism.

Suppose $$m$$ is an isomorphism.
It's trivially monic, since given $$m \circ f = m \circ g$$, we can left-compose by $$m^{-1}$$ to obtain $$f = g$$, and similarly for epic.
To show it is regular epic, we must exhibit it as the coequalizer of a parallel pair.
Take the parallel pair $$C \xrightarrow{m^{-1}, m^{-1}} B$$.
Clearly $$m$$ coequalizes the pair.
Now suppose $$B \xrightarrow{f} D$$ coequalizes the pair (any map does, trivially).
Define $$\varphi : C \rightarrow D$$ as $$\varphi = f \circ m^{-1}$$.
Clearly this makes the appropriate triangle commute, since $$f \circ m^{-1} \circ m = f$$.
Suppose there were another map $$\phi$$ with $$\phi \circ m = f$$.
Right compose with $$m^{-1}$$ to get $$\phi = f \circ m^{-1} = \varphi$$.
So $$\varphi$$ is the unique such map and $$(m, C)$$ is a coequalizer.
