---
title: Massey Exercise 2.7.4
layout: math-page
chapter: 2
exercise: 7.4
---


**Theorem**:
Let $$i^x: X \rightarrow X \times Y$$ and $$i^y: Y \rightarrow X \times Y$$ be the maps $$x \mapsto (x, y_0)$$ and $$y \mapsto (x_0, y)$$ for some fixed $$x_0, y_0$$.
The mapping $$\varphi: \pi(X,x_0) \times \pi(Y,y_0) \rightarrow \pi(X \times Y, (x_0, y_0))$$ by $$\varphi: (\beta, \gamma) \mapsto (i^x_* \beta) \cdot (i^y_* \gamma)$$ is an isomorphism.

----

*Proof*:
Consider the map defined in Theorem 7.1 -- that is, $$\phi : \pi(X \times Y, (x_0, y_0)) \rightarrow \pi(X, x_0) \times \pi(Y, y_0)$$ by $$\alpha \mapsto (p^x_* \alpha, p^y_* \alpha)$$, where $$p^x$$ and $$p^y$$ are the projection maps.
This map is an isomorphism.
We will show that $$\phi \varphi$$ is the identity, so that $$\varphi = \phi^{-1}$$.
Let $$\beta \in \pi(X,x_0)$$ and $$\gamma \in \pi(Y,y_0)$$.
Then,

$$
\phi(\varphi(\beta, \gamma)) = \phi(i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma)
= \Big( p^x_* \big( i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma \big), p^y_* \big( i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma \big) \Big)
$$

Now, note that $$(i^x_* \beta)(t) = (\beta(t), y_0)$$, and similarly for $$i^y_* \gamma$$, so that the product path is:

$$
i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma = \left\{
\begin{array}{lr}
(\beta(2t), y_0) & 0 \leq t \leq 1/2 \\
(x_0, \gamma(2t-1)) & 1/2 \leq t \leq 1
\end{array} \right.
$$

If we apply $$p^x_*$$, the second half of the path will effectively be nullified -- that is:

$$
p^x_* \big( i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma \big) = \left\{
\begin{array}{lr}
\beta(2t) & 0 \leq t \leq 1/2 \\
x_0 & 1/2 \leq t \leq 1
\end{array} \right.
$$

Clearly, this is a path in $$\pi(X,x_0)$$ that traverses $$\beta$$ twice as fast, and as such, it's clearly homotopic to $$\beta$$.
An explicit homotopy is:

$$
F(t,s) = \left\{
\begin{array}{lr}
\beta((2-s)t) & 0 \leq t \leq \frac{1}{2} (1+s) \\
x_0 & \frac{1}{2} (1+s) \leq t \leq 1
\end{array} \right.
$$

A very similar argument proceeds for the other path in the ordered pair, with the first half of the path being nullified and using the 'reverse' homotopy.
We then obtain

$$
p^x_* \big( i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma \big) \sim \beta \qquad
p^y_* \big( i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma \big) \sim \gamma
$$

So, the components of $$(\phi \varphi)(\beta, \gamma)$$ are in the equivalence class of $$\beta$$ and $$\gamma$$, respectively, so $$\phi \varphi$$ is the identity on $$\pi(X, x_0) \times \pi(Y, y_0)$$.
Then, it must be that $$\varphi = \phi^{-1}$$, and is itself an isomorphism.

$$\mjqed$$

---

It follows that the elements $$i^x_* \beta$$ and $$i^y_* \gamma$$ commute.
It's easy to see that $$\phi(i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma) = (\beta, \gamma)$$, and also $$\phi(i^y_* \gamma \cdot i^x_* \beta) = (\beta, \gamma)$$.
So it must be that $$i^x_* \beta \cdot i^y_* \gamma = i^y_* \gamma \cdot i^x_* \beta$$.
